Add file results documentation for Minimal APIs and controllers (#37257)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/fundamentals/minimal-apis/responses.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ms.date: 06/16/2026
```

For more information, see [Filters in Minimal API apps](xref:fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters) and [IResult implementation types](xref:fundamentals/minimal-apis/test-min-api#iresult-implementation-types).

## File result return values

When an API endpoint returns content other than JSON, or supports HTTP protocol features like conditional or range requests,
ASP.NET Core provides result types that handle the necessary HTTP protocol details for you.

> These result types are referred to as "file results", but provide functionality that can be useful more broadly than just files on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These result types are referred to as "file results", but the functionality is useful for scenarios beyond serving files on disk.
```
Translates better this way.

This method sets the `Content-Type` header and, when a file name is provided, the `Content-Disposition` header.
It also handles conditional request headers and range request headers when the appropriate parameters are set on the result object.

### File result types

In Minimal APIs, the most common and recommended way to create a file result is [`TypedResults.File`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.TypedResults.File%2A), which accepts a `byte[]` or `Stream` and returns a [`FileContentHttpResult`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.HttpResults.FileContentHttpResult) or [`FileStreamHttpResult`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.HttpResults.FileStreamHttpResult).

Alternatives include [`TypedResults.Bytes`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.TypedResults.Bytes%2A) for an explicit byte-array helper,
[`TypedResults.PhysicalFile`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.TypedResults.PhysicalFile%2A) for serving files by absolute path, or
[`Results.File`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.Results.File%2A) / [`Results.Bytes`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.Results.Bytes%2A) when you only need the `IResult` interface.

> Also note that ASP.NET Core provides [static files middleware](xref:fundamentals/static-files) that serves files relative to the web root (`wwwroot`) without requiring an explicit endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core also provides [static files middleware](xref:fundamentals/static-files) that serves files relative to the web root (`wwwroot`) without requiring an explicit endpoint.
```
Style guilde recommends avoiding "Also note that"

Alternatives include returning a [`VirtualFileResult`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.VirtualFileResult) for files relative to the web root, or a [`PhysicalFileResult`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.PhysicalFileResult) for files by absolute path, but these are less common as the static files middleware usually handles those scenarios.

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/Controllers/FilesController.cs" id="snippet_file_types":::

### OpenAPI support for file results

File result types don't automatically contribute response metadata to the generated OpenAPI document.
To get a proper response description in the OpenAPI document, you must specify this metadata explicitly.

In Minimal APIs, use the [`Produces<TResponse>()`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.OpenApiRouteHandlerBuilderExtensions.Produces%2A)
extension method to provide the OpenAPI metadata for the response. This metadata determines the status code, content type, and schema for the response in the OpenAPI document.

> For a file result, it's important to specify the content type (e.g. `application/pdf`) and to use an appropriate `TResponse` to get the desired schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a file result, it's important to specify the content type, such as `application/pdf`, and to use an appropriate `TResponse` to get the desired schema.
```
Using "for example" rather than e.g.

You can also specify the status code in the `Produces` extension method if it differs from the default of `200 OK`.
Common status codes are defined in the [`StatusCodes`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.StatusCodes) class, and common content types are defined in the [`MediaTypeNames`](xref:System.Net.Mime.MediaTypeNames) class.
For example:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/FileEndpoints.cs" id="snippet_openapi":::

Conceptually, `TResponse` represents the type of the response body, but the appropriate schema for a file result depends
more on the body content than the CLR type. Therefore, it may be necessary to specify a `TResponse` that doesn't match
the CLR type of the content in the file result in order to get the desired OpenAPI schema.

In particular, there are three common schemas for file results:

- **binary content**, such as PDFs, images, or videos, where the schema should be `type: string, format: binary`.
<!-- Hope we can change this to IBinaryContent if #67145 is approved and implemented-->

> The recommended `TResponse` for this case is `Stream`. The framework has special logic to map

Reviewer 2: Is this where it's handled?

https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/ad2f14fdbc53a72f050070a473954ec0f1e3469d/src/OpenApi/src/Services/Schemas/OpenApiSchemaService.cs#L65-L68

Does that mean that `FileContentHttpResult` already works?

Author: I believe `FileContentResult`, `FileContentHttpResult`, `StreamContentResult`, and `StreamContentHttpResult` were all added in .NET 11 and not backported to .NET 10. So only 'IFormFile`, `Stream`, and `PipeReader` will work in .NET 10.

Reviewer: Sounds like this one was resolved.

this type to the `binary` format in the OpenAPI schema.

- **text content**, such as CSV or plain text. Here the schema should be simply `type: string` with no `format`. Use `string` as the `TResponse` for this case.

> - **base64-encoded content**, where the schema should be `type: string, format: byte`. It is uncommon to base64-encode file content in an API response, but for legacy reasons this is the schema produced when the `TResponse` is `byte[]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The recommended `TResponse` for this case is `Stream`. The framework has special logic to map
  this type to the `binary` format in the OpenAPI schema.
  <!-- Hope we can change this to IBinaryContent if #67145 is approved and implemented -->
- **text content**, such as CSV or plain text. Here the schema should be simply `type: string` with no `format`. Use `string` as the `TResponse` for this case.
- **base64-encoded content**, where the schema should be `type: string, format: byte`. It's uncommon to base64-encode file content in an API response, but for legacy reasons this is the schema produced when the `TResponse` is `byte[]`.
```
Removed extra line spaces and aligned text

In a controller-based app, use the [`[Produces]`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ProducesAttribute) or the [`[ProducesResponseType]`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ProducesResponseTypeAttribute) attribute:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/Controllers/FilesController.cs" id="snippet_openapi":::

As with Minimal APIs, you should choose the `Type` parameter of the `[Produces]` and `[ProducesResponseType]` attributes
that corresponds to the desired OpenAPI schema for your file result responses:
- **binary content** -- Use `FileContentResult` or `FileStreamResult` to get the `binary` format in the OpenAPI schema.
- **text content** -- Use `string` to get a simple `type: string` schema.

> - **base64-encoded content** -- Use `byte[]` to get the `byte` format in the OpenAPI schema, though this is uncommon for file results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **binary content**: Use `FileContentResult` or `FileStreamResult` to get the `binary` format in the OpenAPI schema.
* **text content**: Use `string` to get a simple `type: string` schema.
* **base64-encoded content**: Use `byte[]` to get the `byte` format in the OpenAPI schema, though this is uncommon for file results.
```
Colon instead of mdash in line items like these plus asterisk to start line items per style guide.

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/FileEndpoints.cs" id="snippet_conditional":::

This example also illustrates how to document the `304 Not Modified` response in the OpenAPI document using the `Produces` extension method, and including the `if-none-match` and `if-modified-since` headers as parameters so they're included in the OpenAPI schema for the endpoint.

A controller-based API can achieve the same behavior using the `File` helper method and the `[ProducesResponseType]` attribute:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/Controllers/FilesController.cs" id="snippet_conditional":::

### File result support for range requests

**Range requests** allow clients to request only a portion of a file rather than the entire content. A client sends a `Range` header specifying byte offsets, and the server responds with `206 Partial Content` containing just those bytes. This enables resumable downloads, parallel chunked downloads, and efficient seeking in media players.

> Range requests can also be conditional: the client sends an `If-Range` header containing an ETag or date alongside the `Range` header, and the server returns the partial content only if the resource hasn't changed since then. If it has changed, the server ignores the range and returns the full resource instead. Note that `If-Range` is only evaluated when `entityTag` or `lastModified` is also set on the file result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Range requests can also be conditional: the client sends an `If-Range` header containing an ETag or date alongside the `Range` header, and the server returns the partial content only if the resource hasn't changed. If it has changed, the server ignores the range and returns the full resource instead. `If-Range` is only evaluated when `entityTag` or `lastModified` is also set on the file result.
```
Ambiguous "then" + missing comma

Set `enableRangeProcessing` to `true` to enable range processing. The following examples enable range processing for a video streaming endpoint, and document the additional response types in the OpenAPI metadata.

**Minimal API:**

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/FileEndpoints.cs" id="snippet_range":::

**Controller:**

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../AspNetCore.Docs.Samples/fundamentals/minimal-apis/FileResults/10.x/Controllers/FilesController.cs" id="snippet_range":::

With this configuration, the framework automatically handles the following HTTP interactions:

* **Full request** &mdash; Returns `200 OK` with the complete file.
* **Range request** (`Range: bytes=0-1023`) &mdash; Returns `206 Partial Content` with the `Content-Range` header and only the requested bytes.

> * **Invalid range** &mdash; Returns `416 Range Not Satisfiable`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Full request**: Returns `200 OK` with the complete file.
* **Range request** (`Range: bytes=0-1023`): Returns `206 Partial Content` with the `Content-Range` header and only the requested bytes.
* **Invalid range**: Returns `416 Range Not Satisfiable`.
```
Colon rather them mdash for lists like this.
